# October 2024

## 10/19/2024

I started this diary section in the project. I'm planning on having a markdown file for each month. I will use this to track my progress on the project and my thinking.

### M2 Max laptop arrives

My M2 Max arrived today. This is replacing my M2 Air. The machine has 96GB of RAM and a 38 core GPU. The better screen
and the ability to run local LLMs much faster are the primary reasons for the change. Upgraded it to 15.0.1 once I restored the timemachine
backup from my MBA.

I restored my latest time machine backup to the new machine and started up vscode. I made changes to allow Python 3.12 to be the base
level for the project. This required some changes in the test cases as assertEquals is no longer available.

### Bootstrap DataPlatform sprint

The project is up and running now and I'm hoping to do a Sprint to get back to the project. I would like to get the first DataPlatform running over the next month. This will be a big milestone for the project. The plan is to do a local one. I have 2 large machines to host it locally. I have my M2 Max
with 96GB of RAM which is a good spot for Docker containers and I have my Dell 7090 which has 128GB of RAM, 10 cores and 8TB of SSDs running proxmox. This
is plenty of resources to get the platform running. Docker swarm is my likely container platform for these.

I am planning on using the following stack:

* AirFlow for job scheduling
* Postgres for database sources
* Debenzium for CDC
* Spark 4.0 and iceberg for data processing and storage.
* Live data only and milestoned data will be supported.
* Minio for local S3 storage
* Consumers can query data from iceberg using Spark OR from postgres databases when thats more appropriate.

I'm antipicating scaling problems with AirFlow but that said I would have the same issues with AWS Glue or Microsoft Data Factory. They do not seem
to scale to large job graphs (more than a 100). The job graph for my last job was likely almost a million jobs. The platforms will need to factor
the job graph in to decoupled sections which these scheduling tools can handle.

## 10/20/2024

vscode seems to be killing the battery on the macbook. It won't last the day at this rate. Disabling extensions I don't use to see what happens.

The time machine restore restored the docker desktop application but none of the containers or images which I had working on the old laptop. Docker updated itself
to V4.34.3 and set the available RAM for it to 16GB, the joys of a 96GB primary machine.

Working on setting up docker containers for airflow/gitlab/confluent kakfa connect.

Gitlab container is now working. Just needed the correct hostname. Container gitlab is accesible now using localhost. Changed the root
password. Work on gitlab runners next.

## 10/21/2024

gitlab seems slow, I suspect it's because the docker image is using rosetta (it's an amd64 image).

Changed the hostname on my m2max to m2max.local. This avoids clashing with my BillyAir Macbook Air laptop. Updated the project gitlab env file, deleted the gitlab_vols folder and restarted the docker compose and it's all working. The gitlab admin page is there as expected at m2max.local.

Now, lets configure 2 runners. My plan is to get a local environment running and documented in the project (I have it running on my Dell but I want to do it again to have a repeatable process). Once, I have the pieces running then I will manually create a pipeline to run a simple flow and then write the DataPlatform to recreate that from metadata. You need to create an example starter flow to get an idea of the template you want to automate using DataSurface, at least thats my thinking.

gitlab seemed to be working but I cannot create a project. I can create users and groups. It may be SSL related, changing the forwarded port for the gitlab container to default 443 rather than 9443.

That didn't go as planned. Now, it's only accessible on localhost rather than m2max.local. I still cannot create a project, it fails with the same "Failed to create repository" message on the GUI.

While I cannot create a repository, I could create a runner and register my runner container with the gitlab server. This all just worked on the Dell, no issues like this, could it be rosetta or a version difference?

And this is the problem when you step away from this stuff day to day, for 3 or 4 months. You come back to it and you have forgotten a bunch of stuff and need to learn it again. I know better. So, I need to figure it out again.

My Dell ones seems ok but complained it needed to be upgraded. I stopped the gitlab and runner containers. I did a docker pull latest for the server and runners and then started both containers. They came back up, I can still do things and the upgrade message is gone so I think that worked.

Trying to go back to a previous mature version, 17.3.2 to start with. It seems the latest gitlab-ce was 17.3.5 but the runner only has a 17.3.2. That didn't work either so I need to figure out whats going on.

The gitlab problem seems to be with gitaly and it's gitlab-data folder. The permissions are wrong. They should be git:git for the groups, I think, but they are root:git instead. I tried running the update-permissions gitlab-ctl command but thats done. I tried the reconfigure command instead and it did complain about fixing some permissions but I still have the same problem.

Well, today was a bust. gitlab beat me again. I tried switching the file system in Docker from VirtioFS to gRPC FUSE but then postgres couldn't create a unix socket and gitlab wouldn't start at all. Tomorrow is another day. Works fine on Linux docker is the thing, just not in Docker Desktop on a Mac.

This is feeling like gitlab on kubernetes with helm again. I had kubernetes installed in VMs on my Dell proxmox box. I spent 3 weeks trying to get that working back in May and it never worked. I did get it working first try on my ubuntu docker virtual machine at the time so I don't think it's me. Gitlab just don't seem to do much testing on self hosted setups as far as I can see. These should be turnkey and given my experience on kubernetes/helm and mac docker, they are not. There are a lot of developers using macbooks and I don't see why this stuff doesn't just work. My env variables are just the hostname, thats it, everything else is defaulted, how can this not work out of the box...

## 10/22/2024

I'm starting to wonder if the problem is a bug in Docker Desktop (v4.34.3) on the Mac. I'll try this install on a linux machine to see if it works there. First tried switching docker back to VirtioFS and postgres started again but same problem with gitlab not being able to create a project.

Trying with a Docker installed in a Parallels Virtual Machine running Ubuntu 24. Downloaded docker using snap and will try running gitlab within that VM. It's still an ARM machine but lets see. That didn't work. Docker in ubuntu linux on ARM cannot run x86 images.

Trying a different gitlab image built for arm64, zengxs/gitlab. It fails the same way. Cannot create a new project. I'm creating a group called 'test' and then a new blank project 'test'. This is the error I have been getting continuously:

``` text
The form contains the following errors:
Failed to create repository
Failed to create repository
```

Doing a debugging session on gitlab with Claude. Tried setting the owner and group to git, tried command line versions as git making repository files and moving them, everything seems ok but it does not work. Will try a vanilla x86 linux next.

Reusing an old ubuntu snapshot on my Dell. Installed docker on it which includes docker compose. Copied the .env and docker-compose.yml files over to it. gitlab just works perfectly using these files on ubuntu so this some kind of mac docker desktop issue. I'm not spending any more time on getting gitlab working on docker desktop on my mac as a result. Just for info, MacOS V15.0.1 and Docker Desktop V4.34.3, I'm using gitlab/gitlab-ce:latest (v17.5.0).

As an aside, image snapshots are a godsend on proxmox. I made snapshots as I installed and built up my linux container there:

* Fresh install
* Docker working
* GitLab working
* AirFlow working
* Spark working

This makes it easy to rollback to docker working and then try these gitlab compose files and see if they work. They did work so I just revert back to the main snapshot and everything I already setup is already there.

I wonder how much time I should spend documenting how to get these components running and I'm inclined to not do that as there is plenty of examples already out there. I'll just focus on getting DataSurface working on a certain stack rather than installing the stack.

## 10/23/2024

I have the following docker containers running on my Dell:

* GitLab and 2 runners
* AirFlow
* Confluent Kafka Connect
* Postgres
* Minio
* Spark cluster and 2 workers

I need to get a sample pipeline working and then build a DataPlatform to render that same pipeline using DataSurface high level descriptions of the producer and consumer.

## 10/31/2024

Worked in a Claude session today prototyping code to include in pipeline over the weekend hopefully. Claude is surprisly good at doing this and generating tests. We'll see soon I guess.
